# O3DE 22.05.0 Feature List

## Status: In Progress as of 4/26

The release contains _AT LEAST_ the below features. Additional features may be added as we review pull requests. At this point this list is suitable to move forward with preparing the O3DE Marketing blog post for the release.

The suggested "Top 3" items to highlight (see below for the details) are 1. Motion Matching Updates 2. User-Defined Property support for the Asset Pipeline. 3. Overall performance, stability & automated testing improvements, including Installer Validation.

The general theme of this release is "Quality of Life Improvements, Stability, and Usability".

* Audio System "Improved Audio Controls Editor, including new connection properties for Audio Engines" For more information see https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/6480 and https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/6303
* Asset Pipeline "Prefabs as product of scene processing" Adds a new way to create prefabs by generating them during the asset pipeline's scene builder. 
* Asset Pipeline "Default prefab generation for scene files"	The Prefab gem will automatically create a default procedural prefab for each source scene asset (such as a STL or FBX file) if no scene manifest is discovered.
* Asset Pipeline "Enable community contribution for AssImp"	O3DE's AssImp integration now matches other 3rd party libraries for O3DE.   See https://github.com/o3de/3p-package-source/pull/75 for additional notes.
* Asset Pipeline "Product Dependency Performance Opportunity	Improvements to speed of Asset Processing." Full scan time for Automated Testing is down from ~2.5min to ~40 seconds See https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/6619
* Asset Pipeline	"User Defined Properties"	Add support in Asset Processing to read in user defined properties (UDP) metadata from source assets. UDP can be assigned in content creation tools to store custom properties about hierarchy nodes such as mesh, light, and animation nodes etc to power asset generation workflows for O3DE. See https://docs.o3de.org/blog/posts/blog-udp/
* Asset Pipeline	"Job Dependencies on Products"	Allows Asset Builders to provide a list of products they specifically depend on to better schedule and control create jobs flow in the Asset Processor. See https://github.com/o3de/sig-core/issues/28
* Character	"Motion Matching Phase 2: Customized MM for a game/sim"	Experimental release of the motion matching gem. Motion matching is a data-driven animation technique that synthesizes motions based on existing animation data and the current character and input contexts. An example prefab of a character which is controllable using a gamepad is provided with the gem. More details on the supported features and how things work internally can be found on [the gem's GitHub page.](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/tree/development/Gems/MotionMatching "Motion Matching Gem's Page.")
* Character	"Atom Render Viewport for animation editor"	Initial release of the Atom Viewport for the animation editor. This improves performance significantly, the rendering in the animation editor is now comparable to what one would expect in-game, and the animation editor viewport is now consistent with other O3DE viewports. Note: The legacy OpenGL render viewport for the animation editor is now deprecated.
* Editor	"Generic DOM"	Core framework update to support the Document Property Editor.
* Game Objects	"Improved Script Canvas support for Spawning"	Previously, it was possible to spawn entities using Script Canvas, however, only one call to the SpawnableEntitiesManager was exposed to Script Canvas, which is the SpawnAllEntities call. This feature expands Spawnable API functionality for Script Canvas. It provides more fine-grained control over spawning workflow and spawnable lifecycle as well as better support for handling multiple prefabs.
* Game Objects	"Slice deprecation in automated testing"	The AutomatedTesting project has been converted to use prefabs for all tests (previously there were many that used the previous system, Slices). See Github issue https://github.com/o3de/o3de/issues/7006
* Networking	"Player spawners"	Provides an interface for determining what entity is spawned and where, when a user joins a session. Ownership of spawning a networked prefab now belongs to the game code that uses the Multiplayer Gem. A sample implementation of the spawner logic is provided for reference in the MultiplayerSample project. See: https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/7060 and https://github.com/o3de/o3de-multiplayersample/pull/106
* Physics	"Remove legacy timing/tick system"	The legacy tick/timer system has been completely removed and new timer for O3DE has been added. All systems have been updated to use the new timer. This serves as the foundation for future tick system updates and improvements. Previous smoothing logic was also removed.
* Physics	"Upgrade Physics Automated Tests"	All physics automated tests have been updated to use Prefabs instead of Slices (including PhysX, Cloth and Blast). All tests are using the new test framework (in most cases). Several are also now running in parallel.
* Prism	"Installer validation"	These tests verify that an installer build is valid. The automated tests verify that key binaries exist, that o3de.exe registers engine, create project succeeds, compile project succeeds, asset processor batch succeeds, editor runs, game launcher runs, uninstall succeeds and unregisters engine. Currently run as nightly for O3DE, though the tests are designed so anyone can plug these tests into their quality verification process. Added via https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/7834
* Scripting	"Revive the Mini Map"	Script Canvas now has a "mini map" feature that helps visualize and navigate graphs. Added via https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/6263
* Viewport "Camera	Editor View Bookmarks V1"	View Bookmarks MVP adds the ability to store local view transforms with level prefabs. It has been designed as a solid foundation to expand for all prefabs in the scene. The View Bookmark system aims to allow the user to store different view bookmarks for a root (level) prefab. These bookmarks can be stored locally (currently in the Settings Registry). In future they will be able to be shared in any prefab. More information available at  https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/7855 and https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/8400. The UX experience of the View Bookmarks MVP does not expose view bookmarks to the UI but this is planned for an upcoming release. Bookmarks can be set with Ctrl-<Function Key> and restored with Shift-<Function Key> (currently a maximum of 12 can be set per level).
* Viewport "Experimental Editor Mode Visual Feedback"	In order to make the experience of using the Viewport clearer and more intuitive, additional rendering functionality is being investigated to improve feedback and usability. Editor Mode Visual Feedback is at a very early stage and can be toggled on through the Settings Registry (`--regset=/Amazon/Preferences/EnableEditorModeFeedback=true`). Note: This feature is experimental and under active development. It is a proof of concept (POC) release and is not currently enabled by default. Please see https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/8235 for the initial PR and https://github.com/o3de/o3de/issues/3458 for future updates.
* Viewport "Prefabs Focus Mode Improvements"	A number of fixes and quality of life improvements have been added to Focus Mode Prefab editing. Now Ctrl-S will save the focused Prefab not the entire scene, Focus Mode breadcrumbs now have icons, the right-click context menu grouping has been improved, as well as a number of other small fixes and updates.
* Viewport	"Cursor wrap mode for manipulators was added with help from community member [Pollend](https://github.com/pollend). See [#5155](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/5155) for more details. Note: This is currently an option in the Settings Registry (`--regset=/Amazon/Preferences/Editor/Manipulator/ManipulatorMouseWrapSetting=true`) and is off by default"
* Atom	"Gems can now inject custom passes to the render pipeline at runtime."	Previously it was cumbersome for a Gem to introduce new passes to the render pipeline. Customers had to basically copy/paste the render pipeline or modify the existing assets. A new set of APIs is now available to facilitate customization of the render pipeline. https://github.com/o3de/o3de/wiki/Work-With-Passes-In-Gems. Example of Gems using these new APIs are Terrain, LyShine & TressFX.
* Atom	"New Debug Rendering Level Component" There's a new level component that allows users to visualize and debug various aspects of the rendering, for example visualize the normals, show only diffuse or specular lighting, override certain properties for all materials in the scene, and more. 
* Atom "Pipeline Global Pass Attachment Reference" Users writing .pass files for rendering can now declare and reference attachments in a way that is global to the pipeline
* Atom	"Several usability and performance improvements for DiffuseProbeGrid"	
  * DiffuseProbeGrid Visualization - Displays individual probes and their raw irradiance values as spheres in the appropriate position in the level.
  * Scrolling DiffuseProbeGrid - Allows a DiffuseProbeGrid to be attached to the camera to apply Diffuse GI wherever the camera is located.
  * DiffuseProbeGrid NumberOfRaysPerProbe Setting - The number of rays cast by each probe in the grid can now be adjusted in the DiffuseProbeGrid properties.  This value can be set differently per-grid.
  * DiffuseProbeGrid Irradiance Query - Query the Diffuse GI at any position and direction in the levelImproved DiffuseProbeGrid blending when multiple grids overlap, and around the edges of a grid to blend with the global IBL cubemap.
* Atom	"New CubeMapCapture Component"  Captures a Diffuse or Specular convolved cubemap at any location in the level.
* Atom	"MSAA state is easier to enable/disable."	The MSAA state can now be changed in the MainRenderPipeline.azasset file by setting the MultisampleState/samples parameter.  Setting the samples to 1 will disable MSAA.
* Atom	"Several improvements to Diffuse GI and ReflectionProbe visual quality"	Several improvements to Diffuse GI and ReflectionProbe visual quality.
* Atom	"Simplified and improved re-usability of Material Types."	Creating a new Material Type from another Material Type is a easy as referencing another *.materialtype json file and overriding the properties of interest. No need to copy/paste another Material Type anymore. See this RFC for details: https://github.com/o3de/sig-graphics-audio/issues/16
* White Box	"White Box support for Linux was added to O3DE with help from community member [Pollend](https://github.com/pollend). See [#4654](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/pull/5075) for more details."
