## Meeting Details

- **Date/Time:** August 16th, 2022 @ 5:00pm UTC / 10:00am PDT
- **Location:** [Discord SIG-Release Voice Room](https://discord.gg/Z2bzwCRJEz)
- **Moderator**: @tonybalandiuk
- **Note Taker**: @vincentvincent
- **Agenda**: https://github.com/o3de/sig-release/issues/76

## SIG Updates
**What happened since the last meeting?**
* No significant updates.

## Meeting Notes
* Continue review next release details O3DE Release 22.10.0 Key Information #64 - re-review the dates, any comments?
    * No comment. Everything is still on track.
* Update on status of the feature list for 22.10.0
    * Tony is currently working on the features list. Plan to have preliminary document ready for review this week.
* Update on Release Process Documentation.
    * We will add documentation capturing how do we create stabalization branch in detail. The documentation will be used in the future release.
    * We discuss briefly on how to call for volunteers help for working on the stabailization branch. One of the idea is to create schedule and then assign volunteers who are willing to help on the available dates. This will be further discussed in the future release.
    * Increase awareness around notable label for future releases. Potentially to have monthly recap on what issues are tagged with notable to keep everyone updated and increase motivation to use the label.
* Continue discussion for Roadmap Sig-Release 2022 Roadmap #62
    * Vincent is writing draft. He will send the draft next week into the SIG release channel for feedback.
* Discuss Agenda template and recording of notes.
    * We decided to remove these sections as we don't use those.
        * Outcomes from Discussion topics
        * Action Items
        * Open Discussion Items
    * Add the Agenda issue link into the meeting notes.

## Action Items
* @vincentvincent to complete the O3DE Roadmap maintenance process next week and ask for review.
* @tonybalandiuk to complete the preliminary features list this week.
* @tonybalandiuk to update the agenda template.