## Meeting Details

- **Date/Time:** Dec 16th, 2025 @ 5:30pm UTC / 9:30am PT
- **Location:** [Discord SIG-Release Voice Room](https://discord.gg/Z2bzwCRJEz)
- **Moderator**: @nickschuetz
- **Note Taker**: @nickschuetz
- **Agenda**: Open

## SIG Updates

Release updates:
- 25.10.1 was released on 12/09/25 and is now available on https://o3de.org. Docs followed on 12/16/25.

## Meeting Notes
1. 25.10.1 point release docs issue has been resolved and the point release is now fully available.
2. Discussed how migration to GitHub Actions will impact sig-release and future releases going forward. We may need to have some knowledge trasfer from sig-build for good measure.
3. Discussed how we can better the documentation release process with @JT-SCB-GameDesign. The plan is to have a updated runbook before the next release in April.
4. Continued planning for the 26.04.0 release in April with a look at current O3DE Roadmap items: https://github.com/orgs/o3de/projects/56
5. Disscused closing the gaps on the "lottery test" to ensure smooth releases going forward in case of core contributor absences.
   

## Action Items
1. @nickschuetz and @matteogrs to meet in Jan 2026 about sig release process change proposal to go over any adjustments needed.
2. @JT-SCB-GameDesign and the rest of the #sig-docs-community to provide an updated docs release runbook. They will also be going over how GitHub Actions can help the docs release automation process.
3. @nickschuetz and @matteogrs to go over O3DE Roadmap with @Ulrick28.

## Special Notes

We are going to make a temporary variation to upcoming meetings due to holidays:
23 December was moved to 16 December (today) (at the same hour - 9:30 PT / 18:30 CET), 6 January is cancelled, The standard bi-weekly scheduling will be resumed on the 20th of January.

